---
layout: default
title: Tutorial - Beam Acceleration
---

How does plasma acceleration work? First, how does particle acceleration work in general? Any time you flick an ON switch to something electrical you complete a circuit for electrons to flow from a high voltage side, one terminal of the battery or one prong of the wall plug, to the other low voltage side. That voltage difference between the two power source terminals pushes the electrons along the circuit. In a normal circuit like a flashlight or a lamp, the electrons are accelerated by the voltage difference but they collide with atoms in the wire and are slowed down momentarily or bounce in a different direction only to speed up again along the wire until the next collision. This results in an average “drift” speed for the flow of the electrons at a rate of only millimeters per second in a device powered by a 1.5 volt AA battery. 

However, at the atomic level the voltage accelerates the electrons rapidly to high speeds. In the absence of obstructions they just continue to gain energy of motion as they keep accelerating to higher speeds. That same standard 1.5 volt AA battery can accelerate an electron to a final velocity approaching a million meters per second [link] in the absence of the obstruction of atoms in a wire (link)! Without the wire’s resistance the electron reaches a speed nearly a billion times faster than the drift speed in the wire. In the Linac the electrons move in a vacuumized beam pipe, so they don’t hit anything to slow them down. In each section of the Linac there is an accelerating electric field, a voltage that gives additional speed and energy of motion to the electrons. Since the Linac gives the electrons 42 GeV of energy that means the Linac is the equivalent of 42x10<sup>9</sup>/1.5 = 28,000,000,000 AA batteries in series [link].

Since we know the Linac takes two miles of acceleration to produce the first 42 GeV and the plasma accelerator produces another 42 GeV in about one meter, we know the total voltage between the beginning and end of each device is 42 GV (1 GV = 1 gigavolt = 10<sup>9</sup> volts). In accelerator talk it’s more useful to talk about the volts per meter (V/m), also known as the potential gradient or simply the gradient (link). The Linac gradient is 42 GV/3000 m or 14 MV/m and the plasma gradient is about 42 GV/1m or 42 GV/m which is 42 GV/14 MV = 3000 times as strong as the Linac’s gradient. 

Why can’t the Linac create an equally high gradient? The answer is the Linac accelerating components are made of ordinary solid matter such as various metals and ceramic insulators, all the things that go into electrical components. When those components are exposed to strong electric field gradients, the materials begin to break down electrically. When you get a shock scuffing your feet in dry weather when you touch something, there is an electrical potential between you and the object you are about to touch and before you actually touch it, the air between you ionizes, that is, electrons actually are pulled off of gas molecules of the air creating an electrical path for the charge to jump between you and the object. Gradients in the range of 10 MV/m are about the highest possible with structures made of ordinary solid materials. (This limit can be increased by perhaps a factor of five by operating at temperatures near absolute zero.) The gradient in the plasma is entirely different in origin and can go much higher because material breakdown is not a problem, in fact, the gas ionization (material breakdown!) is actually an essential part of creating the potential in the plasma accelerator.

When a charged particle like an electron is shot through anything (solid, liquid or gas) made up of atoms, the electron may interact with an atom and have an effect on it. The biggest effect the electron can have is limited by how much energy it has, that is, how much energy it can give up to make something happen to the atom. The atomic theory of matter says atoms are made of nuclei of protons and neutrons surround by electrons. The positive charges of the protons repel each other and the negative charges of the electrons repel each other but the positive charges of the protons attract the negatively charged electrons and the whole package is in balance and stays together (the neutrons help keep the peace between the protons packed so close together). 

The simplest atom is hydrogen with a lone proton holding on to a lone electron. The plasma is Lithium with three protons (plus 4 neutron peace keepers) holding on to three electrons. If a charged particle comes whizzing at an atom, in our case, the whizzing charged particles are the beam electrons, the moving electron can have various kinds of interactions with the Lithium atom depending on how much energy the electron has and how much it gives up to the atom it hits. A very low energy electron may only have enough energy to jostle the Lithium and give it a bump that moves the whole atom in one piece. A little more energy and it can “excite” one of the Lithium electrons. The electron remains attached to its atom but it jumps to a higher energy state and then in a while jumps back down emitting a small burst of light. This is what happens in florescent lights. This level of “jostling” involves the transfer of a few eV of energy. Remember the 1.5 volt AA battery can at most give an electron 1.5 eV of energy which is enough energy to light up an LED or warm a wire but not enough to cause fluorescence. 

With even more energy transferred to a Lithium atom, an electron may be completely knocked free and the remaining atom less one electron is said to be ionized creating a net positive atom (an ion) and a negatively charged electron moving around separately from each other. Since protons and neutron are nearly 2000 times heavier than electrons when an ionization event takes place the ion has a great deal of inertia and doesn’t move nearly as far or easily as the electron. And this is the key to what happens in the plasma. (The ion has seven nucleons so it is 7x2000 = 14000 times as heavy as the electron.)

With a very dense bunch of very high energy electrons passing through the Lithium vapor essentially all the Lithium atoms along the beam path have at least one electron ionized. The beam is moving at nearly light speed and leaves an unmoved trail of positive ions in place but the ionized electrons, being far lighter, are pushed away by the negative charge of the beam bunch, that’s the blue cloud in Figure 3.
