---
layout: default
title: The Plain English exposition of the Beam Energy Doubling research paper
---

### Overview

Here is our suggestion for how to approach the energy doubling paper. It is based on the fact that the exposition, like the research paper, contains a lot of interconnected information and you will need to go over the information repeatedly to make those connections:

1. If you don’t like reading from a computer screen, there are three documents we recommend you print off before you begin so you can make notes and make it easier to switch back and forth between them:
   1. This document – the plain English exposition of the beam energy doubling paper.
   1. The research paper.[link]
   1. The physics tutorial that goes along with this plain English exposition.[link]
2. Read this plain English exposition and follow the suggestions that are made along the way to stop and look at the research paper and rate your level of understanding each time you look at the research paper. On this first reading skip over the sections that are indicated to be details. Also skip the hyperlinks to the relevant tutorial sections.
3. Then, read the physics tutorial but skip over the calculations.
4. If you followed steps 2 and 3, you have gone over all the plain English material once and have looked at the research paper a few times. In order to deepen your understanding you can repeat steps 2 and 3 but this time read through the details sections you skipped on the first reading of the exposition and read the calculations in the tutorial that you skipped over on the first reading of the tutorial. Continue to rate your understanding each time you look at the research paper.
5. Finally, to experience what it is like to actually understand physics equations you can repeat all the tutorial calculations yourself with paper and pencil. If you do this exercise you will find that you can just look at the Einstein mass formula and understand what it says the way a physicist sees it.   
6. It is also an option to just skip around all the material according to your own instincts and look at selected topics.

### Introduction

We begin with an explanation of an important paper from the history of plasma acceleration research at the SLAC research lab’s FFTB facility, FACET’s predecessor research facility. To give you a sense of how much you can understand what seems like an arcane research paper let’s do some before and after measurements. Before you go any further, take a look at the research paper we are going to explain. Either open the paper in a new browser tab or print it. Printing may be the easiest way to go back and forth between the journal paper and the interpretative information given here. Also you will be able to mark on the printed copy to make notes for yourself. Look it over, try to read parts of it and notice how much or little you can understand and notice if you tend to think something like, “I could never understand this.” Then come back here and we will explain the paper and have you look at it again a few times as we explain things and you can watch how your understanding increases and see that it is indeed within your capability to understand without needing a PhD in physics. Here’s a link to the paper [link]. 

Welcome back. On a scale from 0-10 how much did you understand? Make a note of this number and as you continue reading the Plain English exposition we will periodically have you look again at the research paper and ask for more 0-10 ratings so you can see if your understanding is progressing. Now let’s begin the explanation of the paper. 

### Background

To make your journey into this story smoother, we will give you a brief introduction to the cast of characters, inanimate entities mostly identified by acronyms like “SLAC”. To the people that work with these entities they have personalities and history and are almost thought of as living beings that evolve over time. 

We begin with SLAC, formerly known as the Stanford Linear Accelerator Center, today officially known as SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory. This is a large research laboratory with many people, with a long history of research projects, and with many buildings, facilities, and departments to handle things like payroll and personal issues. SLAC is operated by Stanford University for the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE). SLAC is located in Menlo Park, California next to Stanford University. Built in the 1960s, SLAC’s work for decades was and still is based on the electron beams produced in its dead straight 2 mile long electron linear accelerator known as the Linac. The Linac was built along with the lab at a cost of something like a billion dollars measured in today’s dollars. The electron beams from the Linac have served many different research projects since it was built. The facilities the Linac provided beams for, which are mentioned here in the story of plasma acceleration research, are the SLC (Stanford Linear Collider), the FFTB (Final Focus Test Beam), FACET (Facility for Advanced Accelerator Experimental Tests) and the LCLS (Linac Coherent Light Source). 

We also mention LEP, the Large Electron Positron Collider that was located at the CERN particle physics laboratory in Geneva, Switzerland. Finally there is LHC, the Large Hadron Collider that replaced the LEP collider in its underground ring tunnel and which collides beams of protons. LHC is where the first direct discovery measurement was made of the Higgs, the long sought final particle to round out the Standard Model theory of particle physics. Finally, we mention the ILC, the hoped for but as yet unfunded International Linear Collider, a next generation SLC. 

### A little history behind the research paper

Racing against the clock at SLAC’s FFTB facility, physicists, engineers and technicians achieved a major breakthrough. Using plasma acceleration, they doubled the energy of part of an electron particle beam. The electron particle beam was created in the conventional particle accelerator, the Linac, at SLAC and all the electrons left the Linac with 42 GeV of energy per electron. [A GeV is a unit of energy](/relativity-tutorial.html#the-electron-volt-ev-an-atomic-sized-unit-of-energy) used to describe the energy of a single particle like an electron. The beam then entered and left a plasma accelerator and some of the electrons had doubled in energy to 84 GeV. Electrons with GeV level energies have velocities almost the speed of light and their behavior is described by [Einstein's Theory of Relativity](/relativity-tutorial.html#relativity-theory). Why is merely doubling something such an accomplishment?  For example, we are used to technological advances like Moore’s law that says computer chip processor speeds will double every two years and they have for a few decades. And what was the hurry? Why were the experimenters racing to get their doubling result?

Plasma acceleration is a new and novel method of accelerating an electron to higher energy. In this experiment the Linac created a beam consisting of tiny bunches of about 1.8 x 10<sup>10</sup> electrons created at a rate of 60 bunches per second at the beginning of the Linac. Each bunch was accelerated along the Linac by very strong electric fields. To get a feeling for [how much energy is in the beam](/relativity-tutorial.html#the-beam-bunch-energy) imagine being pummeled by 60 major league pitchers each hitting you with a fastball every second.[link]

Because the electrons repel each other and because the electrons in the bunch have random thermal motion, beam control technology [link] was required to keep each bunch intact as it moved along the accelerator. The bunches in the Linac were long narrow needle shaped cylinders with a length of 6 millimeters (about 1/4"). The diameter of the cylinder varied as the bunch traveled down the Linac passing through focusing and defocusing beam control magnetic fields. Before it entered the plasma accelerator each bunch was “compressed” in length by a factor of 500 down to about 12 µm (1 µm = 1 micron = 10<sup>-6</sup> meters) and it’s diameter was focused to a “spot size” of 10 µm diameter. (info link on units of measure and orders of magnitude.)  

For the energy doubling experiment, the input beam bunches of 42 GeV electrons were created in the Linac and sent into the FFTB where the experimental plasma accelerator was located. The plasma accelerator that increased the energy of some electrons in the beam bunches to 84 cost perhaps about ten thousand times less than the Linac to build AND was only 3 feet long, about three thousand times shorter than the Linac!! One way of looking at this accomplishment is in an order of magnitude approximation. In order of magnitude, the result represented a thirty million fold jump in capability (roughly one ten thousandth of the cost times roughly one three thousandth the length.) By comparison it would have been easy, in principle, to just build an essentially identical second two mile long linac after the first one and also achieve a doubling of energy. But doing it thirty million times better is the kind of thing physicists pop a cork of bubbly to celebrate. 

Why were they racing the clock? The FFTB was a research facility built about two decades earlier ~1980 to learn how to precisely focus the electron beams from the Linac for SLAC’s premiere project of the 1990s, the linear collider (SLC), a novel particle research facility that collided a beam of electrons at 45 GeV with a beam of positrons at 45 GeV. The research at SLC along with work at the same time at a similar type of facility, LEP, at CERN, helped establish the current Standard Model theory of particle physics. The Standard Model was articulated in the early 1970s based partially on Nobel prize winning research in the late 1960s and early 1970s done using the SLAC Linac. 

To collide the two beams at the SLC required not only focusing the beams to tiny micron sized spots but knowing exactly where they were located and controlling their location accurately and precisely to make them collide with each other as they came together from opposite directions at essentially the speed of light. The research to develop that level of beam control technology was successfully undertaken in the FFTB, a facility built specifically to learn how to control the beams for SLC. After the beam control research was finished at the FFTB and while the linear collider physics research program was running at the SLC, the FFTB was available for other research projects, and plasma acceleration was studied there for a decade. In ~2000 the SLC linear collider’s research was complete and the FFTB was going to be dismantled to make way for an amazing new facility to use the Linac to create a free electron X-ray laser (FEL) beam ten millions times better than any previous one had accomplished, and indeed, the FEL project was a success and corks were popped for this new facility, the LCLS in 2011. The last beam run at FFTB was scheduled in order to give the plasma project a shot at energy doubling. The run had a hard and fast end date and the doubling was achieved. 

From a scientific research point of view the energy doubling experiment at that time was partially a public relations effort. There were other important matters of plasma acceleration to continue to be studied. But where would they be studied once the FFTB was gone? To build a new research facility somewhere else at the lab would cost several million dollars. With a lot of competition for research funds and government deficits eating into research money, getting another facility would be a challenge. 

The plasma research group decided one thing to do was to demonstrate in a powerful way the ultimate goal of studying plasma acceleration, namely, to learn how to create plasma accelerators for many possible uses. And doing the energy doubling experiment would certainly create an easy to understand, easy to explain and easy to remember “sound bite” about the value and purpose of their research.  They did indeed beat the clock and, eventually got the funds for a new facility, FACET, and today are at work on further research into plasma acceleration and plasma accelerators. 

Normally experiments and research are not under the gun quite so dramatically as this project was, but funding concerns are a part of most scientific research today. The excitement of achieving important goals is not always as dramatic but it, too, is always a part of research. Scientific research is after all a human activity carried out by people who are no different than anyone else when it comes to having a successful career. 
 
### Research papers

The purpose of scientific papers is to allow other scientists who are interested in what you are doing to understand exactly what you did. There are at least two reasons for this. First, to evaluate what you did and see if it all makes sense, to look for any possible mistakes and to look for alternate possible interpretations of the data. In most experiments, data is collected and analyzed for its meaning. Before you write your paper you undertake an excruciating evaluation to be sure you haven’t overlooked anything that might shed a doubt on what you’ve concluded. The second purpose of a research paper is to describe what you did in enough detail so that someone else could try to reproduce your results. 

These two aspects: questioning of methodology/interpretation of data and reproducing results elsewhere, are the cornerstone of how science creates consensus. Comparing with politics, for example, people can give detailed and carefully thought out explanations for a policy goal but there is no standard methodology that can lead to a consensus of what policy is best.
 
Writing a research paper can be a significant part of the research. Note that the paper focuses on a specific identifiable result worth publishing. The research itself typically uncovers a great deal of information that does not appear in the paper. Often these other discoveries point the way to new questions to answer and but generally go unmentioned in the paper currently being written.

### Energy doubling research paper overview

Let’s return our focus to the research paper. In a moment we will send you back to look again at the paper and based on what you’ve read since that first look, see if you can at least understand that the paper is about energy doubling of electrons. Notice all the jargon that means nothing to you but try to see that it is mainly describing the details of how the experiment was conducted.  

First notice the structure of the paper: There is a title and a list of authors. The paper is in a common format for research papers, double column. The text begins with the abstract, the long paragraph in bold face type, a kind of executive summary. Based on what you know now you should be able to understand much of this opening paragraph. Notice there are three sets of figures in the paper. Notice beginning on page three in the second part of the paper there is a section called Methods and that section has four sub-sections: 1) Electron pulse, 2) Plasma generation, 3) Energy Measurement and 4) Simulation. At the end of the paper are the references to other research cited in this paper. 

Read the opening paragraph and peruse the rest of the paper again. See what you can understand based on what you know so far, get a feel for it then come back and we will explain the experiment in more detail and then you will be able to go back again and actually read the paper with a deeper level of comprehension. So have another look and come back here again. Here’s the link to the energy doubling paper.  

Welcome back. Now that you’ve looked at the paper a second time rate your current sense of understanding on the 0-10 scale once again and write it down with your previous number. Have you made any progress?

You’ve had a more focused and assisted look at the paper now. Some questions that might have occurred to you (it always helps when studying something to have questions in your mind as you read):
1)	Why did the plasma accelerator double the beam energy? Why not triple? Why not only a half-fold increase? 
2)	Where does the additional energy come from to increase the energy of some of the electrons? Conservation of energy says it doesn’t come out of nothing. The Linac is driven by a megawatt power system, the plasma accelerator has no power input at all except the heat to keep the plasma hot and the second law of thermodynamics says you can’t directly convert heat to organized energy of motion in this type of situation so the extra beam energy cannot come from the heat of the plasma.
Think about these questions and try to come up with an answer. Actually the answers are implicit but right on the surface of the first paragraph of the paper. As we go on from here you will learn if your answers were correct. 

The paper has two major sections. There are two plus pages of discussion of the results of the experiment and that is followed by a Methods section which actually explains the experiment so we will focus on the Methods section now. 

We can get an overview of this experiment by considering the four topics of the Methods section, each one describing an element of the experiment. The first element is the electron beam from the Linac and it is described in the first topic, Electron Pulse. The second element is the plasma accelerator described in the second topic, Plasma generation. The third element of how the final beam energy coming out of the plasma accelerator was measured is described in the third topic, Energy measurement. These three elements of the experiment are displayed in the Figure 1 schematic of the experiment. So far so good, but what is the fourth topic on simulation about? 

You know the scientific method usually involves testing a theory; we make a prediction using theory and then we make a measurement and see if it agrees with the theory. If so, the theory is supported, if not, then some serious thinking is required to find out whether something went wrong in the experiment or whether the theory is wrong (or perhaps, the theory is correct but was incorrectly applied in some way.) For physics we tend to think of theory prediction as a matter of solving equations. Sometimes when complex phenomena are involved a computer program is written that “simulates” the theory. In this case a program that incorporates some of the known relevant physics of plasma acceleration was used to predict approximately what would happen. 

The first figure is a very simple schematic of the apparatus involved showing the beam, the plasma accelerator and the energy measurement apparatus consisting a magnet that bends the beam and two screens that record the direction of the beam. The second figure set displays the measurement, what was seen on the screen and also shows what the simulation predicted and by displaying them together it compares theory and experiment. The third figure set displays information about the simulation. Go back to the paper again and briefly scan it. Look at the first figure and read its caption. Read each of the four methods sections and come back here. Make your third 0-10 rating on your understanding. (By now you should be starting to feel at least a little bit at home with the paper.) 

Are you starting to think the paper actually might be within your ability to understand with some more explanation? By now you should be feeling a little more familiar with this paper. And if you have delved into more than the bare minimum we have suggested to look at, you might be feeling that although you are starting to get the big picture, the details are still pure Greek. Journals are expensive to produce because they have limited circulation. For that reason and others, brevity and concise writing are required. Many journals have a word limit and authors will spend a lot of time figuring out how to present as much information as they can in as few words as possible. If the energy doubling paper seems dense, that’s because it is dense. 

Let’s take a moment and boil this all down to the experimental method of science. The basic pattern is 
1)	A theory (expressed in the simulation shown in Figure 3) makes predictions (shown in Figure 2b)
2)	The predictions are tested in an experiment (by the apparatus summarized in the Figure 1 schematic). 
3)	The results of the experiment are a measurement (Figure 2a shows data that was projected on the screen in Figure 1). 
4)	The measurement is compared with the theory (Figure 2b). 
The figures mentioned with each of the cardinal four steps described above are, of course, supplemented in the text with much more explanation. It is useful to orient yourself with these basic four parts of a scientific experiment and see their presence in the paper provides the paper with its ultimate meaning and purpose. 

### More specifics on some important issues covered in the paper

How does plasma acceleration work? First, how does particle acceleration work in general? Any time you flick an ON switch to something electrical you complete a circuit for electrons to flow from a high voltage side, one terminal of the battery or one prong of the wall plug, to the other low voltage side. That voltage difference between the two power source terminals pushes the electrons along the circuit. In a normal circuit like a flashlight or a lamp, the electrons are accelerated by the voltage difference but they collide with atoms in the wire and are slowed down momentarily or bounce in a different direction only to speed up again along the wire until the next collision. This results in an average “drift” speed for the flow of the electrons at a rate of only millimeters per second in a device powered by a 1.5 volt AA battery. 

However, at the atomic level the voltage accelerates the electrons rapidly to high speeds. In the absence of obstructions they just continue to gain energy of motion as they keep accelerating to higher speeds. That same standard 1.5 volt AA battery can accelerate an electron to a final velocity approaching a million meters per second [link] in the absence of the obstruction of atoms in a wire (link)! Without the wire’s resistance the electron reaches a speed nearly a billion times faster than the drift speed in the wire. In the Linac the electrons move in a vacuumized beam pipe, so they don’t hit anything to slow them down. In each section of the Linac there is an accelerating electric field, a voltage that gives additional speed and energy of motion to the electrons. Since the Linac gives the electrons 42 GeV of energy that means the Linac is the equivalent of 42x10<sup>9</sup>/1.5 = 28,000,000,000 AA batteries in series [link].

In the plasma, it is the same principle. There is an electric field that is created in the plasma by the beam itself and in a sense the beam accelerates itself. But conservation of energy says that’s not possible so what is actually happening is that electrons at the front of the bunch are using some of their energy to create an electric field in the plasma that accelerates electrons at the back of the bunch. The bunch enters the plasma accelerator with all the electrons having approximately the same energy but the bunch exits the plasma with a wide range of electron energies. You may wonder how this works since it might seem the bunch should quickly spread out in length as some electrons gain energy and others lose energy but relativity comes to the rescue making the seemingly impossible possible – [link].

Figure 2 shows the energy spread of the electrons in the bunch after they have passed through the plasma accelerator. Notice the horizontal scale is electron energy in GeV and the scale goes from 35 GeV on the left to 100 GeV on the right. There are electrons with energy below 35 GeV but they are simply not shown. The spread of energies in Figure 2a should not be misinterpreted as the faster electrons somehow being ahead of the lower ones. It is a plot of spread in energy, not a plot of spread in space. It is understandable to expect a spread in space based on ordinary everyday experience. When a car accelerates and goes faster, it gains energy and speed and moves away from slower cars. Not so for electrons with relativistic speeds. See why here– [link].

The vertical scale of Figure 2b, the bottom plot, shows the number of electrons with each energy. Looking at Figure 2b, we see the blue line for the measured values and the red line for the simulation predicted values. Both lines show a peak around 42 GeV, the incoming beam energy and they show that some electrons have lost energy (left of the peak) and some electrons have gained energy (right of the peak). The simulation data does not exactly match the measured data but it is generally the same pattern and the differences have mostly to do with the simulation not taking into account all the relevant factors. This experiment was not intended to be a precision measurement, instead it was intended as a kind of proof of principle demonstration where just reasonably accurate predictions and measurements were sufficient (link). 

The red and blue lines in Figure 2b are the electrons’ energy after leaving the plasma accelerator. If you imagine the sharp triangular spike of the red line at 42 GeV extended all the way down to the bottom of the plot that would be a representation of the beam energy distribution just before its entry into the plasma accelerator when its energy distribution was spread only 1.5 GeV wide around 42 GeV.  

Now we understand that the paper title does not mean that a beam at 42 GeV is all doubled to exactly 84 GeV but that a portion of the beam is raised to energies from just above 42 GeV all the way up to over 84 GeV. One of the experimental enhancements available at the new FACET facility is the ability to create two separate bunches of electrons very close together by basically splitting the original bunch in the Linac into two pieces. The expectation, if this works is that the energy profile seen in Figure 2b will look more like a peak at 84 GeV for the trailing bunch.

Since we know the Linac takes two miles of acceleration to produce the first 42 GeV and the plasma accelerator produces another 42 GeV in about one meter, we know the total voltage between the beginning and end of each device is 42 GV (1 GV = 1 gigavolt = 10<sup>9</sup> volts). In accelerator talk it’s more useful to talk about the volts per meter (V/m), also known as the potential gradient or simply the gradient (link). The Linac gradient is 42 GV/3000 m or 14 MV/m and the plasma gradient is about 42 GV/1m or 42 GV/m which is 42 GV/14 MV = 3000 times as strong as the Linac’s gradient. 

Why can’t the Linac create an equally high gradient? The answer is the Linac accelerating components are made of ordinary solid matter such as various metals and ceramic insulators, all the things that go into electrical components. When those components are exposed to strong electric field gradients, the materials begin to break down electrically. When you get a shock scuffing your feet in dry weather when you touch something, there is an electrical potential between you and the object you are about to touch and before you actually touch it, the air between you ionizes, that is, electrons actually are pulled off of gas molecules of the air creating an electrical path for the charge to jump between you and the object. Gradients in the range of 10 MV/m are about the highest possible with structures made of ordinary solid materials. (This limit can be increased by perhaps a factor of five by operating at temperatures near absolute zero.) The gradient in the plasma is entirely different in origin and can go much higher because material breakdown is not a problem, in fact, the gas ionization (material breakdown!) is actually an essential part of creating the potential in the plasma accelerator.

When a charged particle like an electron is shot through anything (solid, liquid or gas) made up of atoms, the electron may interact with an atom and have an effect on it. The biggest effect the electron can have is limited by how much energy it has, that is, how much energy it can give up to make something happen to the atom. The atomic theory of matter says atoms are made of nuclei of protons and neutrons surround by electrons. The positive charges of the protons repel each other and the negative charges of the electrons repel each other but the positive charges of the protons attract the negatively charged electrons and the whole package is in balance and stays together (the neutrons help keep the peace between the protons packed so close together). 

The simplest atom is hydrogen with a lone proton holding on to a lone electron. The plasma is Lithium with three protons (plus 4 neutron peace keepers) holding on to three electrons. If a charged particle comes whizzing at an atom, in our case, the whizzing charged particles are the beam electrons, the moving electron can have various kinds of interactions with the Lithium atom depending on how much energy the electron has and how much it gives up to the atom it hits. A very low energy electron may only have enough energy to jostle the Lithium and give it a bump that moves the whole atom in one piece. A little more energy and it can “excite” one of the Lithium electrons. The electron remains attached to its atom but it jumps to a higher energy state and then in a while jumps back down emitting a small burst of light. This is what happens in florescent lights. This level of “jostling” involves the transfer of a few eV of energy. Remember the 1.5 volt AA battery can at most give an electron 1.5 eV of energy which is enough energy to light up an LED or warm a wire but not enough to cause fluorescence. 

With even more energy transferred to a Lithium atom, an electron may be completely knocked free and the remaining atom less one electron is said to be ionized creating a net positive atom (an ion) and a negatively charged electron moving around separately from each other. Since protons and neutron are nearly 2000 times heavier than electrons when an ionization event takes place the ion has a great deal of inertia and doesn’t move nearly as far or easily as the electron. And this is the key to what happens in the plasma. (The ion has seven nucleons so it is 7x2000 = 14000 times as heavy as the electron.)

With a very dense bunch of very high energy electrons passing through the Lithium vapor essentially all the Lithium atoms along the beam path have at least one electron ionized. The beam is moving at nearly light speed and leaves an unmoved trail of positive ions in place but the ionized electrons, being far lighter, are pushed away by the negative charge of the beam bunch, that’s the blue cloud in Figure 3.

Now take another look at the paper and read through it from beginning to end, rate yourself 0-10 and see how far you have come since your first look at the paper. Have you confirmed our contention yet that research is understandable? 

### Some Details on the Figures. (skip this section on first reading)


##### The energy measurement: 

Figure 1 indicates an energy measurement is made after an electron bunch leaves the plasma accelerator and Figure 2a shows the data obtained on a CCD screen for a single bunch of electrons. The research paper as a whole is reporting on data obtained by making the same measurement on 800 bunches. When a charged particle passes through a magnetic field the particle’s direction of movement is changed because the magnetic field applies a force on the particle at a right angle to the particle’s direction of motion. The force is proportional to the particle’s momentum, the greater the momentum the stronger the sideways push. When all the particles have the same momentum their directions will all be changed the same amount, but if they have different momenta their directions will be changed different amounts and the bunch will be spread out in space. That is what we see in Figure 2a. Momentum has a fixed relation to energy, thus the locations of the electrons indicate their energy. 

##### The Figure 2: 

The Figure 2a CCD picture uses different colors to indicate the number of electrons hitting the CCD at each location. The color scale for 2a is tucked in the upper right hand corner of 2b just below 2a and shows the numerical meaning of each color. If we were to create a series of vertical slices or bands across 2a and add up the hits in each slice and plot it, we would have the blue line of Figure 2b. The blue line peaks in the area where there is the most red above it in 2a. The scale in millimeters along the top of 2a is the amount the electrons direction was changed by the magnet. Given the magnet strength, the geometry of the apparatus on the physics of particle energy and amount of bending these millimeter distances translate into an energy value for electrons and that is what is given in the horizontal scale along the bottom of 2b. Notice it is a logarithmic scale where the distance of bending scale is linear. This is because the relation between energy and bending is a power law relationship.  

##### The Figure 3a simulation: 

It is important to note the details in the figure. First note that the top figure, 3a, is a simulation of what is happening when the bunch is 12.3 cm into the heated Lithium vapor. The bottom figure, 3b, is near the end of the Lithium vapor at 81.9cm. It is especially important to note the horizontal scale is not distance into the plasma accelerator which would be measured in centimeters. Rather, the scale is in microns and shows bunch scale details around the bunch at the two locations along the plasma accelerator. Notice also, the vertical axis is also in microns, again showing things on the tiny scale of a bunch and not on the scale of the plasma accelerator diameter which is measured in centimeters. 

##### The figure 3c measured data and simulation data comparison: 

As noted in the research paper, two plasma accelerators were studied, one with a Lithium vapor length of 85 cm and a second longer one of 113 cm. The longer accelerator was to measure what happens when the effective acceleration ends. The orange circles in Figure 3c plot the simulated amount of maximum energy the electrons acquired at various distances into a simulate Lithium column 120 cm long. The simulation shows the energy increases as the bunch progresses through the plasma to a maximum just above 80 GeV and then drops off past this point just beyond 80 cm into the plasma indicating that the most accelerated electrons begin to lose energy. The blue squares are the actual values measured in the two different length real accelerators and they are pretty close to the simulated expectation. The simulation is known to be imperfect in that it does not account for all known effects, so exact agreement is not to be expected between simulation and experimentally measured data. Remember, this was a proof of principle experiment, not a precision measurement. The vertical scale on the left hand side of the plot refers to the plotted energy of the electrons. The vertical scale on the right hand side refers to the dashed line at the bottom of the plot which represents the profile of the density of the Lithium vapor assumed in the simulation.

### Where to next?

There is more about this plasma acceleration energy doubling experiment to be explained but we will do that in our expositions of some of the earlier experiments that led up to this result. The same basic issues and technologies were involved in those earlier papers so by studying a few of the papers you should be able to get a pretty good grounding in the plasma research project at FACET. 

We have begun the story of plasma acceleration _en medias res_, in the middle, with the energy doubling experiment. It is natural to ask questions about how the research has reached this point. But we emphasize "in the middle" because the research is on going and it is natural to ask where the research is going. For example, it is typically very desirable to have an accelerated beam of particles all have the same energy for most applications and in this experiment we have seen that although enormous gains have been made in creating accelerating gradients the result is a wide spread of beam particle energies. 

One focus of research after this is to create final beams of particles all with the same energy. We have seen that the front of the beam bunch creates the field that accelerates the back of the bunch. Some of the energy required to do this goes to creating the plasma, that is to ionize the Lithium gas. The heater only vaporizes the Lithium, it does not ionize it. 

An alternate way to ionize a path through the gas is with a very powerful laser beam precisely timed to go through the gas just before the beam bunch enters the plasma accelerator. Then the job of the front of the bunch is only to push the ionized electrons away from the beam path to create the wakefield that accelerates the rear of the bunch. And even that arrangement can perhaps be improved by separating the bunch into two parts: a lead bunch that is discarded after creating the wakefield and a trailing bunch that is more uniformly accelerated. This idea and many others are part of the ongoing plasma acceleration research at FACET.








