---
layout: default
title: Plain English Papers
pagetype: reference
---

This is an experiment in communicating detailed scientific research to the interested general public. It is based on a concept suggested by the DZero Collaboration at Fermilab in the 90s, the Plain English Paper. They astutely recognized that science proceeds by establishing and publishing specific focused results and these results are self-contained packets of information. But they are written in arcane jargon for other specialists and even a PhD physicist in another field would have trouble comprehending such a paper, much less the lay public. 

However, at DZero, they also hypothesized that the actual scientific results were comprehensible by any interested intelligent person if properly explained. The late great American physicist, Richard Feynman, said if he couldn’t explain a physics idea to a lay person then he didn’t understand it himself. The Plain English Paper, as its name implies, is an exposition of a journal published research paper in plain English. Below we will present the history and current status of plasma acceleration research undertaken at the SLAC laboratory over the past two decades. We will present this history using the Plain English Paper concept by focusing on the results presented in important papers over the years. We have set the standard for our plain English expositions that they will enable you to actually read and understand the corresponding research paper, if you carefully read the corresponding Plain English Paper exposition first. 

Any research paper assumes the reader knows certain underlying physics. For example, these papers assume the reader is familiar with some specialized units of measure. It assumes familiarity with relativistic physics, electromagnetism and particle acceleration and particle beams (all technical jargon soon to be explained.) In the explanations of the research papers, when that background knowledge is required, you will find hyperlinks to explanations of the background physics. Of course, we cannot give you an entire course on each subject but what we will do is give you an understanding of whatever laws or principles of physics are needed to understand that specific paper. As you go on to read further papers here about plasma acceleration, those papers will also need links to explain the background physics and you will get further chances to see and understand the background information in a new context. 

You may wonder if it is possible for a lay person to understand a physics research paper, then what is the difference between a physicist who has studied and trained for many years to do the research and the person who has been able to understand the research in a few short hours of study? It is like many specialized fields where the difference is between understanding the ideas and actually being able to work creatively and productively with them. Your car mechanic may show you a worn car part and explain how it works but you would not have been able to diagnose the problem, disassemble the car, order the right replacement parts, install them and test the car for proper performance. Your doctor may explain your condition to you but you would not have been able to diagnose the condition or know how to treat it. We can explain the physics of the experiment and its results but you would still be unable to have thought up the experiment in the first place, made the relevant predictions from theory, built the equipment, conducted the experiment and written the paper. 

(Note: The DZero Plain English Paper idea did not catch on, even at DZero. We believe the idea was sound but, as is usually the case, the first attempts to implement a new idea can be flawed. Edison famously tried hundreds of versions of the incandescent light bulb before hitting upon the implementation that has lighted homes for a hundred years. Our implementation of the Plain English Paper differs in important ways from the DZero version. Our version is based on an analysis of what worked and what didn’t work in the DZero version so we owe much credit to them if what we have developed here works.)

(Note: To help elucidate concepts we use two web page text devices, hover and hyperlinks to additional material. By hovering the mouse over text marked xxx you can get a pop up short explanation. By following a hyperlink to another web page you can get a much more detailed discussion of a concept. We suggest reading the plain English presentation in the following way. If you just want to understand what the paper is talking about, i.e., to get the jargon explained, skip all the links except for the links to the paper itself. Do look at the paper each time we suggest it. If you want to get a feel for how the physics works follow the links for more details. In this latter case, where you want to learn some physics, we suggest you read through this material at least twice. The first time through, skip the links to additional deeper explanations, but do look at the paper itself and then read through a second time following the links to the physics as you go.)

(Note: We want to give you a quantitative mathematical feel for the physics involved but when we use math in this exposition we will limit it to arithmetic and some basic algebra, especially the use of exponents. Regarding calculus we will simply use one important result from calculus, the Taylor’s expansion although we offer a primer on how calculus would apply if we moved beyond arithmetic.)
