---
layout: default
title: Plain English expositions of plasma acceleration research papers
---



Academic research papers published in professional journals for experts are notoriously inaccessible to all but a narrow field of specialists. Why is this? Two possible explanations are obvious candidates.

One possibility is that the subject of the research itself is difficult to understand. Oftentimes very complex research equipment and advanced mathematics as well as years of training are required to do the research so it shouldn’t be a surprise if the subject of the research itself is difficult to understand. A look at research papers tends to support this idea. They contain terminology: nouns, verbs, adjectives and equations, all of which are incomprehensible to the point it is even hard to make out the structure of a sentence sometimes. Doesn’t this prove the subject matter under study must be difficult to understand?

Or one might hope beyond hope that perhaps the subject matter is actually comprehensible to a non-specialist if it is explained in plain English. Perhaps all that jargon is actually just cryptic shorthand to expedite communication between experts. People with very ordinary jobs doing nothing more difficult to understand than cooking and serving in a highly organized fast food store often use shorthand jargon. In a restaurant you might have heard something like “refill 13B”. That’s shorthand for “the patron at table number 13 sitting in the B seat needs more coffee.” Once you know what the jargon means, it is easy to understand.

We believe the latter is the correct explanation for the obscurity of a great deal of research publication. Richard Feynman, a Nobel Prize winning American physicist in the 20th century, also known for his teaching ability, said that if he couldn’t explain an idea to laymen, it meant he didn’t truly understand it himself.

We have endeavored to demonstrate this second explanation for the obscurity of research papers by presenting plain English expositions of some research papers about the development of plasma based particle accelerators.

The approach of the presentations is top-down, first get an overview of the forest then delve into increasing levels of detail, the trees. There are three documents used to make the presentation of each research paper. First there is the research paper itself. Second, there is the plain English exposition of the contents of the paper. Third, there is a physics tutorial to provide important physics background for the paper. The exposition and the tutorial have the layered top-down structure.

We suggest the following approach to using the material: The first question is your personal preference regarding following documentation, some people prefer printed copy and some people prefer to read on the computer screen. The presentations involve some going back and forth between the three documents. Having at least a copy of the research paper will probably work best for most people, especially if you have to pop windows up and down to switch documents.

The exposition and the tutorial will indicate which material should be skipped over on the first reading to facilitate getting the top down view without too much detail. The second pass through the exposition and the tutorial is the time to read the omitted details. The tutorials included calculations that you can follow and perform yourself on a third reading of the tutorial if you want to get to the place where you can just look at an equation and understand what it is saying, just like understanding a sentence in English. Remember, an equation is just a sentence expressing relationships between physical properties.

We suggest that you look at the research paper frequently as you study the expositions, since the ultimate goal is to understand the research paper itself. If you follow the order of exploration that we suggest, we will have you first look at the research paper with no preparation and have you note how much you are able to understand. Then we will guide you through some explanations in plain English along with some tutorial material about relevant background physics. As we go along we will have you periodically go back to the research paper to read it again and at each return notice if you are gaining in understanding. We believe that by the end you will be able to read the entire paper and understand what it is saying. In fact, that is the standard we have set for the plain English expositions for each research paper we present. Not surprisingly, the word count for the overall plain English presentation is an order of magnitude greater than the research paper.

This material will not read like a novel. There is a lot of information to absorb and organize in your own mental system. Our goal is to make it understandable without being superficial. This will require study on your part, that is, it will require some time and attention. The more time and attention applied the better your understanding. We have presented the physics tutorials with three levels of study possible. They do contain some mathematics at the level of algebra and they do contain some calculations. On the first reading, you can read through the tutorial skipping the math to get the basic facts being presented. On second reading actually read through the math sections to see how the calculations are done to get to the essential results presented. Finally, for someone who wants to see what it feels like to actually do physics calculations we suggest that you follow along and repeat the calculations yourself with pencil and paper.

Our presentation begins with an important paper on the doubling of the energy of a beam of electrons in a plasma accelerator. For this paper on energy doubling, the physics tutorial focuses on one issue: understanding the essential but counter-intuitive fact that the particle bunch stays together as some electrons in it lose energy and others gain energy. This is an effect that can only be understood in terms of the Einstein Special Relativity Theory of particles moving at nearly the speed of light. The tutorial will give you a comprehensible and detailed chance to truly understand this strange relativistic effect that plasma acceleration depends upon. It’s as if, in a tight pack of marathon runners nearing the end of the race, some run low on energy and can’t keep pushing as hard, some keep up the same effort and others reach deep for some energy and put on a strong finishing push – and yet the runners’ stay in the same positions and the pack remains intact as it moves towards the finish line. But how could this happen? The answer is in the tutorial.

After we have presented the material to help you understand the energy doubling paper you can go in one of two directions to learn more about plasma acceleration. One path loops back to the earlier plasma acceleration research at the FFTB and explains a series of papers that were written over the years describing research to learn how to master plasma acceleration that lead up to the beam energy doubling experiment. You will see a very typical history of the development of understanding of a phenomenon through scientific experimental research. The other path available to you is to jump to the present state of plasma acceleration research at FACET and understand the questions that are under active research now and get a glimpse of possible future developments.




<p>Here is a link to <a href="/plain-english-papers.html">more about the history and philosophy of plain English expositions</a></p>

<p>To get started on learning more about plasma acceleration go here <a href="/energy-doubling-exposition.html">Energy doubling research paper explained</a></p>

